But even then we have to fight the sheer nature of the web and network architecture.
In this example, over 50 percent of the time from pressing enter in
the address bar to the page being displayed is spend waiting for the answer.
This waiting period is called Time to First Byte or TTFB.
If this website needed to grab additional resources,
we would have to wait for the response of
our first request before we could send out a second request.
That in turn means that we have another period of
time waiting that is not being used effectively.
This problem is called Head of Line Blocking.
Let's see an example of what Head of Line Blocking
is and how it is bad for the user experience.
With HTTP, a connection is like a queue.
While the first request is being handled,
all other requests have to wait until it is their turn.
A lot of time is being wasted here.
All right, one medium coffee. Enjoy.
Hey, can I order a drink now?
Yeah, what will you have?
Okay, great. I'd like a venti, half-whole milk,
one quarter, one percent, one quarter non-fat,
extra hot, split quad shot,
one and a half shots decaf, two and a half shots regular,
no foam latte, with whip,
two packets of Splenda, one sugar in a raw,
a touch of vanilla syrup and three short sprinkles of cinnamon.
And I'm kind of in a hurry. Thanks.
Okay, got it.
While Richard's drink is being prepared,
the other customers are left waiting.
Even though their request would be much faster to make,
the head of line is blocking the rest of the customers.
To counteract this limitation a little bit,
browsers open up to six parallel connections,
or in our coffee shop comparison,
they hire another barista.
So while the first connection is waiting for its first byte,
a second request can already be sent on the second connection, and so on.
Of course, hiring a new barista takes off time and training.
In the browser, opening all these connections is also
quite costly because of the GCP handshakes necessary.
The six parallel connections browsers can make is
still only a band aid for the head of line blocking.
If you have a lot of resources on your page,
you will spend most of your time waiting or staring at the cashier.
Head of line blocking is a huge bottleneck to website performance.
Browsers being able to open up six parallel connections help, but it's not great.
Later, we will see how HTTP to fix this issues with head of line blocking.